MSC2265: Proposal for mandating case folding when processing e-mail address localparts (#2265)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2265-email-lowercase.md

localparts in e-mail addresses must be processed with the original case
preserved. [The Matrix spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pid-types)
doesn't mandate anything about processing e-mail addresses, other than the fact
that the domain part must be converted to lowercase, as domain names are case
insensitive.

On the other hand, most major e-mail providers nowadays process the localparts
of e-mail addresses as case insensitive. Therefore, most users expect localparts
to be treated case insensitively, and get confused when it's not. Some users,
for example, get confused over the fact that registering a 3PID association for
`john.doe@example.com` doesn't mean that the association is valid for
`John.Doe@example.com`, and don't expect to have to remember the exact
case they used to initially register the association (and sometimes get locked
out of their account because of that). So far we've seen that confusion occur
and lead to troubles of various degrees over several deployments of Synapse and
Sydent.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests changing the specification of the e-mail 3PID type in
[the Matrix spec appendices](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pid-types)

> to mandate that, before any processing, e-mail address localparts must go

Reviewer: why just the localpart? Pretty sure if I email JOHNDOE@GMAIL.COM it works fine.

Author: The spec already says the domain part should be treated without case sensitivity. Though it's probably better to extend the casefolding to the whole email address to avoid any confusion.

Author: Fixed in 2e2f1c11

so the UX improvement outweighs this trouble.

## Potential issues

### Conflicts with existing associations

Some users might already have two different accounts associated with the same
e-mail address but with different cases. This appears to happen in a small
number of cases, however, and can be dealt with by the identity server's or the
homeserver's maintainer.

For example, with Sydent, the process of dealing with such cases could look
like:

1. list all MXIDs associated with a variant of the email address, and the
   timestamp of that association
2. delete all associations except for the most recent one [0]
3. inform the user of the deletion by sending them an email notice to the email
   address

### Storing and querying

Most database engines don't support case folding, therefore querying all
e-mail addresses matching a case folded e-mail address might not be trivial,
e.g. an identity server querying all associations for `strauss@example.com` when
processing a `/lookup` request would be expected to also get associations for
`Strauß@Example.com`.

To address this issue, implementation maintainers are strongly encouraged to

> make e-mail addresses go through a full case folding before storing them.

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, store an index-friendly value next to the user-entered one in the database.

Reviewer 3: That works for the v1 lookup, but the new lookup method uses hashes, and in future it's possible that only the hashes will remain saved in the database.
As such a full case folding seems like a required step from my perspective.

# Proposal for mandating lowercasing when processing e-mail address localparts

[RFC822](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc822#section-3.4.7) mandates that
localparts in e-mail addresses must be processed with the original case
preserved. [The Matrix spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pid-types)
doesn't mandate anything about processing e-mail addresses, other than the fact
that the domain part must be converted to lowercase, as domain names are case
insensitive.

On the other hand, most major e-mail providers nowadays process the localparts
of e-mail addresses as case insensitive. Therefore, most users expect localparts
to be treated case insensitively, and get confused when it's not. Some users,
for example, get confused over the fact that registering a 3PID association for
`john.doe@example.com` doesn't mean that the association is valid for

> `John.Doe@example.com`, and don't expect to be expected to remember the exact

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`John.Doe@example.com`, and don't expect to have to remember the exact
```

case they used to initially register the association (and sometimes get locked
out of their account because of that). So far we've seen that confusion occur
and lead to troubles of various degrees over several deployments of Synapse and
Sydent.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests changing the specification of the e-mail 3PID type in
[the Matrix spec appendices](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pid-types)
to mandate that any e-mail address must be entirely converted to lowercase

> before any processing, instead of only its domain.

Reviewer 2: I wonder how much of complication is to mandate lower-case processing (such as lookup and hashing) but case-preserve storing addresses.

Reviewer: we ultimately can't tell implementations how to store their data (if they want to spend the extra time converting things to uppercase they can), but the requirement for lookups being lowercase is a fairly strong argument imo

## Other considered solutions

A first look at this issue concluded that there was no need to add such a

> mention to the spec, and that it can be considered as an implementation detail.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
mention to the spec, and that it can be considered an implementation detail.
```

However, [MSC2134](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134) changes
this: because hashing functions are case sensitive, we need both clients and

> identity servers to follow the same policy regarding case sensitivity.

Reviewer 4: Additionally, we're looking to make everything hash-based in the future, which will make this proposal even more important.

## Tradeoffs

Implementing this MSC in identity servers would require the databases of
existing identity servers to be updated in a large part to convert the email
addresses of existing associations to lowercase, in order to avoid conflicts.
However, most of this update can usually be done by a single database query (or

> a background job running at startup), so the UX improvement outweights this

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a background job running at startup), so the UX improvement outweighs this
```

trouble.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 4: What about the case where two email addresses `john.doe@example.com` and `John.Doe@example.com` are registered to two separate user accounts on a homeserver? Is this is problem in the current homeserver landscape or can it just be a "tough luck and ignore"?

Author: Oooh good catch. I think it's going to be as much as an issue for homeservers as for identity servers, and remediation solutions would look the same... I'll spell it out in the MSC.

Author: Done in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2265/commits/520c76a1cb8e8669ac624be3c36cc606aeb4cba6

Reviewer 4: Sure

Some users might already have two different accounts associated with the same
e-mail address but with different cases. This appears to happen in a small

> number of cases, however, and can be dealt by the identity server's maintainer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
number of cases, however, and can be dealt with by the identity server's maintainer.
```

# Proposal for mandating lowercasing when processing e-mail address localparts

[RFC822](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc822#section-3.4.7) mandates that
localparts in e-mail addresses must be processed with the original case
preserved. [The Matrix spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pid-types)
doesn't mandate anything about processing e-mail addresses, other than the fact
that the domain part must be converted to lowercase, as domain names are case
insensitive.

On the other hand, most major e-mail providers nowadays process the localparts
of e-mail addresses as case insensitive. Therefore, most users expect localparts
to be treated case insensitively, and get confused when it's not. Some users,
for example, get confused over the fact that registering a 3PID association for
`john.doe@example.com` doesn't mean that the association is valid for
`John.Doe@example.com`, and don't expect to have to remember the exact
case they used to initially register the association (and sometimes get locked
out of their account because of that). So far we've seen that confusion occur
and lead to troubles of various degrees over several deployments of Synapse and
Sydent.

## Proposal

> This proposal suggests changing the specification of the e-mail 3PID type in

Reviewer 5: what should be the behaviour of (a) an ID server when I try to /bind an email address that contains un-casefolded characters (b) a HS when I call an endpoint that proxies such a request?

Author: Always lowercase/casefold, which is what I meant by "before any processing". I'll try to reword this expression to make it less vague.

this: because hashing functions are case sensitive, we need both clients and
identity servers to follow the same policy regarding case sensitivity.

An initial version of this proposal proposed to mandate lowercasing e-mail
addresses instead of case folding them, however it was pointed out that this
solution might not be the best and most future-proof one.

> Unicode normalisation was also looked at but judged unnecessary.

Reviewer 5: was it? did you happen to check if gmail lets you register `brêndan` and `brêndan` as different addresses?

Author: It doesn't let you register either of those:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5547783/65898336-3c2bea80-e3a9-11e9-85ab-9f5fc622580c.png)

Reviewer 5: ok so I didn't mean "register".

For whatever test you did to determine if it considers `bréndan.abolivier` the same as `brendan.abolivier`: does it consider `brêndan` the same as `brêndan` ?

Author: ftr we had a chat about this afterwards on another channel and concluded that it was probably too much of a faff to test for something that's probably too much of an edge case.
